"Gentle Introduction to Arrow / Record Batches" #11336 (#18051)
apache/datafusion: docs/source/user-guide/arrow-introduction.md

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# A Gentle Introduction to Arrow & RecordBatches (for DataFusion users)

```{contents}
:local:
:depth: 2
```

This guide helps DataFusion users understand [Arrow] and its RecordBatch format. While you may never need to work with Arrow directly, this knowledge becomes valuable when using DataFusion's extension points or debugging performance issues.

> **Why Arrow is central to DataFusion**: Arrow provides the unified type system that makes DataFusion possible. When you query a CSV file, join it with a Parquet file, and aggregate results from JSON—it all works seamlessly because every data source is converted to Arrow's common representation. This unified type system, combined with Arrow's columnar format, enables DataFusion to execute efficient vectorized operations across any combination of data sources while benefiting from zero-copy data sharing between query operators.

Reviewer: As part of a follow on PR we can also copy some of the introductory material from https://jorgecarleitao.github.io/arrow2/main/guide/arrow.html#what-is-apache-arrow which I think is well written, though maybe it is too "database centric" 🤔

> **Why Arrow is central to DataFusion**: Arrow provides the unified type system that makes DataFusion possible. When you query a CSV file, join it with a Parquet file, and aggregate results from JSON—it all works seamlessly because every data source is converted to Arrow's common representation. This unified type system, combined with Arrow's columnar format, enables DataFusion to execute efficient vectorized operations across any combination of data sources while benefiting from zero-copy data sharing between query operators.

Reviewer: It might also be nice to mention here something like "DataFusion uses Arrow as its native internal format both for zero-copy interoperability with other libraries, as well as to leverage the highly optimized compute kernels available in arrow-rs

- **Zero-Copy Data Sharing**: Systems can share Arrow data without conversion overhead

Arrow has become the universal standard for in-memory analytics precisely because of its **columnar format**—systems that natively store or process data in Arrow (DataFusion, Polars, InfluxDB 3.0), and runtimes that convert to Arrow for interchange (DuckDB, Spark, pandas), all organize data by column rather than by row. This cross-language, cross-platform adoption of the columnar model enables seamless data flow between systems with minimal conversion overhead.

Within this columnar design, Arrow's standard unit for packaging data is the **RecordBatch**—the key to making columnar format practical for real-world query engines.

## What is a RecordBatch? (And Why Batch?)

A **[`RecordBatch`]** cleverly combines the benefits of columnar storage with the practical need to process data in chunks. It represents a horizontal slice of a table, but critically, each column _within_ that slice remains a contiguous array.

Think of it as having two perspectives:

- **Columnar inside**: Each column (`id`, `name`, `age`) is a contiguous array optimized for vectorized operations

> - **Row-oriented outside**: The batch represents a chunk of rows (e.g., rows 1-1000), making it a manageable unit for streaming

Reviewer: Maybe you can throw in here that the default batch size is 8192 rows and can be controlled by the `datafusion.execution.batch_size` config setting https://datafusion.apache.org/user-guide/configs.html

    let schema = Arc::new(Schema::new(vec![
        Field::new("id", DataType::Int32, false),
        Field::new("name", DataType::Utf8, true),
    ]));
    let batch = RecordBatch::try_new(
        schema.clone(),
        vec![
            Arc::new(Int32Array::from(vec![1, 2, 3])) as _,
            Arc::new(StringArray::from(vec![Some("foo"), Some("bar"), None])) as _,
        ],
    )?;

    // expose it as a table
    let table = MemTable::try_new(schema, vec![vec![batch]])?;
    ctx.register_table("people", Arc::new(table))?;

    // query it
    let df = ctx.sql("SELECT id, upper(name) AS name FROM people WHERE id >= 2").await?;
    df.show().await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

## Common Pitfalls

When working with Arrow and RecordBatches, watch out for these common issues:

- **Schema consistency**: All batches in a stream must share the exact same [`Schema`]. For example, you can't have one batch where a column is [`Int32`] and the next where it's [`Int64`], even if the values would fit
- **Immutability**: Arrays are immutable—to "modify" data, you must build new arrays or new RecordBatches. For instance, to change a value in an array, you'd create a new array with the updated value

> - **Buffer management**: Variable-length types (UTF-8, binary, lists) use offsets + values arrays internally. Avoid manual buffer slicing unless you understand Arrow's internal invariants—use Arrow's built-in compute functions instead

Reviewer: I would say this is more like "avoid row by row operations" rather than buffer management. Maybe something like 

```suggestion
- **Row by Row Processing**: Avoid iterating over Arrays element by element when possible, and -- use Arrow's built-in compute functions instead
```

> - **Type mismatches**: Mixed input types across files may require explicit casts. For example, a string column `"123"` from a CSV file won't automatically join with an integer column `123` from a Parquet file—you'll need to cast one to match the other

Reviewer: Maybe link to the cast kernel: https://docs.rs/arrow/latest/arrow/compute/fn.cast.html

## When Arrow knowledge is needed (Extension Points)

For many use cases, you don't need to know about Arrow. DataFusion handles the conversion from formats like CSV and Parquet for you. However, Arrow becomes important when you use DataFusion's **[extension points]** to add your own custom functionality.

These APIs are where you can plug your own code into the engine, and they often operate directly on Arrow [`RecordBatch`] streams.

- **[`TableProvider`] (Custom Data Sources)**: This is the most common extension point. You can teach DataFusion how to read from any source—a custom file format, a network API, a different database—by implementing the [`TableProvider`] trait. Your implementation will be responsible for creating [`RecordBatch`]es to stream data into the engine. See the [Custom Table Providers guide] for detailed examples.

- **[User-Defined Functions (UDFs)]**: If you need to perform a custom transformation on your data that isn't built into DataFusion, you can write a UDF. Your function will receive data as Arrow arrays (inside a [`RecordBatch`]) and must produce an Arrow array as its output.

> - **[Custom Optimizer Rules and Operators]**: For advanced use cases, you can even add your own rules to the query optimizer or implement entirely new physical operators (like a special type of join). These also operate on the Arrow-based query plans.

Reviewer: I think typically custom optimizer rules are more concerned about the Schemas than the arrays, but I think we can leave this as is too

(read entire rows)                (process entire columns at once)
```

### Why This Matters

- **Vectorized Execution**: Process entire columns at once using SIMD instructions
- **Better Compression**: Similar values stored together compress more efficiently
- **Cache Efficiency**: Scanning specific columns doesn't load unnecessary data
- **Zero-Copy Data Sharing**: Systems can share Arrow data without conversion overhead

DataFusion, DuckDB, Polars, and Pandas all speak Arrow natively—they can exchange data without expensive serialization/deserialization steps.

## What is a RecordBatch? (And Why Batch?)

A **[`RecordBatch`]** represents a horizontal slice of a table—a collection of equal-length columnar arrays sharing the same schema.

### Why Not Process Entire Tables?

- **Memory Constraints**: A billion-row table might not fit in RAM
- **Pipeline Processing**: Start producing results before reading all data
- **Parallel Execution**: Different threads can process different batches

### Why Not Process Single Rows?

- **Lost Vectorization**: Can't use SIMD instructions on single values
- **Poor Cache Utilization**: Jumping between rows defeats CPU cache optimization

> - **High Overhead**: Managing individual rows has significant bookkeeping costs

Author: You're right -
 I essentially repeated the same points. My intention was to show the progression from "too big" (entire table) → "too small" (single rows) → "just right" (batches), but I see it reads as repetitive.
 
 I'll consolidate into a single "Why batches are the sweet spot" section that covers both extremes concisely without redundancy. 
 
 Do you have suggestions, I might not see ?

> - **High Overhead**: Managing individual rows has significant bookkeeping costs

Reviewer 2: We could even simplify it to a single line like "it's more efficient to process data in batches etc." and have more focus on how/when you interact with the record batches directly, rather than having details on why DF uses recordbatches (if the point of the guide is to ease users into getting familiar with interacting with arrow api)

### RecordBatches: The Sweet Spot

RecordBatches typically contain thousands of rows—enough to benefit from vectorization but small enough to fit in memory. DataFusion streams these batches through operators, achieving both efficiency and scalability.

**Key Properties**:

- Arrays are immutable (create new batches to modify data)
- NULL values tracked via efficient validity bitmaps

> - Variable-length data (strings, lists) use offset arrays for efficient access

Author: Good catch!
 I mixed RecordBatch properties with Array implementation details. These technical details don't help someone understand "why RecordBatches" at a conceptual level. I'll either:
1. Remove these details entirely, **OR**
2. Reframe as "What this means for users" (e.g., "Data is immutable, so operations create new batches rather than modifying existing ones")

The offset arrays detail especially doesn't belong in a gentle introduction. 

Would you prefer I remove this section or refocus it on user-facing implications?

- **[Custom Optimizer Rules and Operators]**: For advanced use cases, you can even add your own rules to the query optimizer or implement entirely new physical operators (like a special type of join). These also operate on the Arrow-based query plans.

In short, knowing Arrow is key to unlocking the full power of DataFusion's modular and extensible architecture.

## Next Steps: Working with DataFrames

Now that you understand Arrow's RecordBatch format, you're ready to work with DataFusion's high-level APIs. The [DataFrame API](dataframe.md) provides a familiar, ergonomic interface for building queries without needing to think about Arrow internals most of the time.

The DataFrame API handles all the Arrow details under the hood - reading files into RecordBatches, applying transformations, and producing results. You only need to drop down to the Arrow level when implementing custom data sources, UDFs, or other extension points.

**Recommended reading order:**

1. [DataFrame API](dataframe.md) - High-level query building interface
2. [Library User Guide: DataFrame API](../library-user-guide/using-the-dataframe-api.md) - Detailed examples and patterns

> 3. [Custom Table Providers](../library-user-guide/custom-table-providers.md) - When you need Arrow knowledge

Reviewer: I also think different users will also need to use different APIs. There are plenty of people who will use the DataFrame API, but an important class of users will also want to go deeper.

> ## Further reading

Author: Agreed Thank you for helping me tighter focus and leaving more verbose details to external links -

IPC is too deep for this guide's scope. I'll trim the references to focus on:
- Main Arrow documentation (for those wanting to go deeper)
- DataFusion-specific references (MemTable, TableProvider, DataFrame)
- The academic paper (for those interested in the theory)

I'll remove IPC, memory layout internals, and other implementation-focused references.
